🧠 SECTION 1 — Lists

1: Write a Python program to remove duplicate elements from a list without using built-in set().


Method 1: Using a loop (recommended & beginner-friendly)

# Remove duplicates from a list without using set()

original_list = [1, 2, 2, 3, 4, 4, 5]

unique_list = []

for item in original_list:
    if item not in unique_list:
        unique_list.append(item)

print("Original List:", original_list)
print("List after removing duplicates:", unique_list)

Method 2: Using list comprehension (shorter version ✨)

original_list = [1, 2, 2, 3, 4, 4, 5]

unique_list = []
[unique_list.append(x) for x in original_list if x not in unique_list]

print(unique_list)

2: Write a Python program to find the second largest number in a list.


3: Write a Python program to count the occurrence of each element in a list.

4: Write a Python program to merge two lists into a single list without duplicates.

5: Write a Python program to split a list into even numbers and odd numbers.
Write a Python program to flatten a nested list.


📘 SECTION 2 — Dictionary Questions (Very Important for Data Engineers)

These simulate JSON handling tasks.

Write a Python program to check whether a key exists in a dictionary.
Write a Python program to merge two dictionaries.
Write a Python program to convert two lists into a dictionary.

📄 SECTION 3 — File Handling Questions (High Probability in Interviews)

Very important for ETL pipelines.

Write a Python program to read a CSV file and print its contents.
Write a Python program to count number of lines in a file.
Write a Python program to count number of words in a file.
Write a Python program to count occurrences of a specific word in file.
Write a Python program to append new content into existing file.
Write a Python program to copy content from one file to another file.
Write a Python program to extract numbers from a text file.

📦 SECTION 4 — JSON Handling Questions (Very Frequently Asked in Data Engineering)

Real pipeline scenarios.

Write a Python program to read JSON file.
Write a Python program to convert JSON data into dictionary.
Write a Python program to extract nested values from JSON.

📊 SECTION 5 — Data Processing Questions (Most Important Section)

These simulate real ETL transformations.

Write a Python program to remove duplicate rows from dataset.
Write a Python program to handle missing values in dataset.
Write a Python program to replace NULL values with default values.
Write a Python program to filter dataset based on condition.
Write a Python program to join two datasets using common column.
Write a Python program to aggregate dataset values.
Find total salary department wise
Write a Python program to convert CSV file into dictionary format.
Write a Python program to convert dictionary into dataframe-like structure.

⚙️ SECTION 6 — Functions Questions
Common conceptual + coding questions.

Write a Python function to calculate factorial of number.
Write a Python function using default parameters.
Write a Python function using *args.
Write a Python function using **kwargs.
Write a Python function to check prime number.
Write a Python function to reverse string.

⚠️ SECTION 7 — Exception Handling Questions
Often asked for production pipeline readiness.

Write Python program using try-except block to handle file not found error.
Write Python program to handle division by zero exception.
Write Python program using finally block.
Write Python program to create custom exception.

🧬 SECTION 8 — Generators & Iterators
Conceptual questions.

Difference between iterator and generator.
Write generator function for even numbers.
Write generator function for Fibonacci series.

🧱 SECTION 9 — Object Oriented Programming (Light Questions Only)
Expected basics only.

Create class Employee with attributes name and salary.
Create constructor inside class.
Demonstrate inheritance using parent and child class.
Demonstrate method overriding example.
Demonstrate encapsulation example.

📈 SECTION 10 — Pandas Questions (Almost Always Asked Before PySpark)
Using pandas

Read CSV file using pandas.
Select specific columns from dataframe.
Filter rows based on condition.
Handle missing values using fillna().
Remove duplicate rows.
Merge two dataframes.
Perform groupby aggregation.

🚀 SECTION 11 — Real Data Engineer Scenario Questions (Most Important)
These are interview favorites.

Read CSV file and remove duplicates.
Convert CSV file into parquet format.
Read JSON file and flatten nested structure.
Extract error messages from log file.
Compare two datasets and find differences.
Read API response and store into file.
Process large file line-by-line efficiently.
Schedule script execution automatically.
Retry failed records processing logic.
Log pipeline execution status.


⭐ If You Prepare These 25 Questions First (Priority List)
Most interview-efficient subset:

Remove duplicates from list
Count frequency using dictionary
Read CSV file
Read JSON file
Flatten nested JSON
Handle missing values
Join two datasets
Merge dictionaries
args vs kwargs
Exception handling example
File read/write program
Iterator vs generator
List comprehension example
Lambda function example
Merge two dataframes
Groupby aggregation
Filter dataframe rows
Convert CSV → dictionary
Extract numbers from file
Replace null values
API response parsing
Compare two datasets
Log file parsing
Convert JSON → dataframe
Write reusable function for ETL step
